---
title: Assessment of Depression Guidelines
description: "Paragraphs that describe Assessment of Depression Guidelines "
author: Quan
date: 2023-06-06T08:19:59.692Z
tags:
  - Depression
---
For adolescents, the USPSTF suggests the use of a depression-focused instrument (such as the freely available Patient Health Questionnaire989) for initial screening. When using this and other instruments that include suicidality items remotely (eg, via patient portal) in advance of well visits in primary care settings, consideration must be given to the management of a positive response to the suicidality question, which necessitates urgent assessment. For this reason, primary care settings using remote screening might consider the adolescent-validated,90 freely available PHQ-2 instrument, which does not include suicidality items for the initial depression screen, to be followed by in-person administration of the PHQ-9 at the well visit if the PHQ-2 score is positive. For younger children, a similar remote screening consideration could be the child and adolescent validated, freely available Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (SMFQ), which does not include suicidality items, to be followed by in-person administration of the Long Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (LMFQ) at the well visit if the SMFQ score is positive. In the context of a psychiatric evaluation, symptoms of depression typically are identified through input from referral sources; spontaneous youth or parent report (the presenting problem or chief complaint); or during the clinician’s review of psychiatric symptoms or the conduct of the mental status examination. However, because of the variability inherent in nonsystematic methods of identification, a more standardized approach to symptom review may be useful. As one option, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) developed the freely available parent- and self-rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures to screen for multiple psychiatric disorders including depression. Both the parent- and self-rated versions of the Level 1 Cross-Cutting measure have demonstrated good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials conducted in pediatric clinical samples across the United States. These instruments could be included in intake packets to systematically and efficiently gather information about presenting problems remotely, prior to the evaluation. As with remote use of the PHQ-9, remote administration of the Cross-Cutting measure must consider management of a positive response to the suicidality items, which necessitate urgent assessment; as such, the suicidality items may be deleted and deferred until the in-person visit.