---
title: "Sports Medicine: Screening Tools Utilized for Regular Health Monitoring
  and Lower Extremities"
author: "Talia Cheng "
date: 2023-07-21T15:30:21.561Z
tags:
  - Other
---
#### **P﻿re-Participation Physical Examination** 

For patients in general, the Pre-Participation Physical Examination Monograpy, 5th Edition is suggested as the comprehensive screening tool utilized as the resource for medical providers to best monitor and determine athletes’ health and physical conditions. In the cases mentioned above that involve adolescents, the AAP (American Academy of Pediatrics) guidelines, which are targeted towards infants, children, adolescents, and young adults, suggest this tool as well for conducting a system-based examination to include cardiovascular, nervous system, general medical conditions, respiratory system, gastrointestinal and urogenital, dermatological, musculoskeletal, and mental health. 

It should also be mentioned that the PPE serves to find alternatives for athletes; primary care providers can make one of several decisions: declare the athlete medically eligible for sports without restrictions, medically eligible for sports without restriction but further evaluation needed, medically eligible for certain sports listed on the form, not medically eligible for any sports (pending further evaluation), or not medically eligible for any sports. Thus, mentioning that these are potential consequences and decisions that need to be made after an athlete’s potential injury is important information for patients and their guardians to be notified of as well. 

It is important that PPE should occur around 6 weeks before activity to allow for further evaluation or treatment if needed. It should also be mentioned to patients and their guardians that comprehensive PPEs are recommended every 2-3 years with annual focused history updates in intervening years. 

#### **C﻿CAPS-34**

But so far, only a small number of screening tools have been studied and validated in the athlete or student-athlete population. For example, though many schools utilize the standardized Counseling Center Assessment of Psychological Symptoms (CCAPS-34), mental health screening at various educational institutions like universities, still appear inconsistent and not standardized. Thus, it could be beneficial to have a recommendation for mental health that is similar to CCAPS-34 so further action can be taken, as questionnaires alone may not identify symptoms or disorders correctly, and be subject to biases from the patient. These are some examples of assessment tools: 

1. SHMRT-1: can be utilized by student-athletes, coaches, family members, and health professionals to recognize mental health problems → presents a list of athlete experiences and indicators of mental health problems/specific disorders
2. Sport Mental Health Assessment Tool (SMHAT-1) : A 3-stage tool that can be completed on paper or online and is used by sports medicine physicians and other licensed/registered health professionals
3. 1. Step 1 to utilize this tool is the Athlete Psychological Strain Questionnaire (APSQ) with a defined threshold → when surpassed, the athlete is moved to step 2 with 6 additional embedded screening tools that assess for:
   2. 1. Depression (PHQ-9): assess presence and severity of depressive symptoms; threshold values defined as minimal (0-4), mild (5-9), moderate (10-14), moderate-severe (15-19), and severe (20-27). 
      2. Anxiety (GAD-7): screens for presence/severity of symptoms of anxiety as minimal (0-4), mild (5-9), moderate (10-14), and severe (15-21). 
      3. Sleep problems (ASSQ): categorize sleep as none (0-7), milk (5-7), moderate (8-10), and severe (11-17) 
      4. Alcohol use disorders (AUDIT-C): a brief screening instrument that identifies individuals engaging in hazardous drinking patterns or active alcohol use disorders (abuse/dependence). If the score is positive (3 for women and 4 for men), drinking patterns can be identified → the higher the score, the more hazardous the habits 
      5. Substance misuse (CAGE-AID): Scores of 1 or more prompts consideration of further mental health assessment, and also allows for easy identification of substances used by the athlete.
      6. Disordered eating (BEDA-Q)
   3. Step 3 features an algorithm that outlines interventions once given the specific score outcomes from step 2. 

In general, because a wide array of screening tools cannot be practically or efficiently implemented at times, a single comprehensive tool for sports medicine mental health, like the SMHAT-1 or SMHRT-1 can be utilized in accordance with one for physiological assessment like the PPE for the optimal regular health screening of sports participants. 

#### **F﻿unctional Movement Screen**

Another example of regular screening/predicting injury screening that can be recommended to patients and their parents is the Functional Movement Screen (FMS) utilized in pre-participation assessments to identify athletes with a higher risk of injury. It is especially recommended as studies have found the negative correlation between FMS score and injury prevalence. For example, through linear regression it was found that there is a predictive relationship between FMS score (<14) and injury risk in patients (4x more likely to sustain an injury in competition season). Thus, this should be mentioned along with the PPE in a response email as advice and preventive measures to take to encompass both health and physical injury risks. 

* Multiple studies have investigated the correlation between FMS score and injury prevalence. One study found that 69% of the female collegiate subjects in lower extremity dominant sports who scored less than fourteen sustained an injury.4 They concluded through linear regression that there is a predictive relationship between FMS score (less than 14) and injury risk in athletes without a history of major musculoskeletal injury.4 Athletes scoring less than fourteen were also four times more likely to sustain an injury in their competitive season. Another study established a 0.91 specificity of the FMS for serious injury which was defined as the athlete on injured reserve for a minimum of three weeks.5 The authors, however, could not establish a cause and effect relationship between injury risk and low FMS score. In a similar study involving professional football players, at least one asymmetry on the FMS regardless of the total score increased the injury risk.5 The consequences associated with injury and the need for accurate screening tools are not limited to athletes. The injury rate among firefighters in nearly the highest across all occupations at 88,500 each year.6 Forty-four percent have suffered a sprain or strain while on duty. Linear regression found a correlation between firefighters’ FMS score and past musculoskeletal injury.6 Previous injury lowered FMS by 3.44. Logistic regression, on the other hand, found no significant correlation between FMS score and injury occurrence.6 In the military, about one million non-deployed active service members have experienced an injury. Musculoskeletal injuries accounted for 24% of all medical evals and nearly 40% of recruits in boot camp suffered an injury.7 Service members with a FMS score under 14 and three mile run time greater than 20.5 minutes were four times more likely to sustain an injury. Run time and FMS score combined were better predictors of traumatic rather than overuse injuries.
* Most of the studies available only established a correlational relationship between a specific screening tool and injury risk. To produce a causal relationship, a cutoff value of the screening assessment needs to be determined to separate athletes into high and low risk groups. A randomized control trial with an intervention program for high risk athletes then must determine if injury risk is truly caused by the predetermined variable.8 Currently there is no screening test that can predict injury with adequate test properties and no intervention study with evidence in support of screening result.8 Although some may say that injury prediction through screening test is unrealistic8 , there is a high demand for such a test by athletes, coaches, health care professionals and team owners. 
* Athletes with scores of fourteen or less on the Functional Movement Screen (FMS) are significantly associated with injuries. Sensitivity and specificity of the FMS as a whole are 0.55 and 0.49 respectively for overall risk of injury. A significant correlation has been found between FMS (Fig. 4) scores under fourteen and injury prediction in athletes without previous ACL reconstruction.

  **Deep squat** 

  * The athlete stands with feet shoulder width apart, grasps a dowel in both hands and presses the dowel directly above the head. The athlete then descends in a squat as deep as possible while maintaining an upright torso and keeping heels and dowel in position. A score of three is awarded if the upper torso is parallel with the tibia, the femur is below horizontal and the knees and dowel are aligned over the feet. A two is recorded if these criteria are met only when the heels are elevated on a block. As with all of the test positions, a zero is given if there is any pain associated with the movement.

  **Hurdle Step** 

  * While standing tall, the athlete places a dowel behind the neck, across the shoulders. They then raise the light leg and step over the hurdle while maintaining foot alignment with the ankle, knee and hip. The athlete touches the floor with the heel and returns to the starting position. A score of three is earned if the hips, knees and ankles remain aligned in a sagittal plane with minimal movement in the lumbar spine. If the athlete fails to achieve these criteria, a two is given.

  **Incline Lunge**

  * The athlete places a dowel along the spine with it touching the head, upper back and middle of the buttocks. The right hand should be against the back of the neck and the left on the lower back. The athlete then steps onto a 2x6 with a flat right foot and the left heel placed ahead at a distance equal to the length of his/her tibial tuberosity. While keeping the dowel in contact with the body, the athlete descends into a lunge so the right knee touches the 2x6 behind the left heel and returns to the starting position. A score of three is described as a lunge with no torso movement, dowel remains in contact with the body and vertical and dowel and feet stay in a sagittal plane.

  **Shoulder Mobility** 

  * After making a fist with the fingers around the thumb, the athlete places the right fist overhead and down the back as far as he/she can while simultaneously placing the left fist up the back as far as possible without creeping the hands closer together. The examiner then measures the distance between the two closest points of each fist. If the fists are within one hand length and one-and-a-half hand lengths, then a score of three and two are given respectively. A shoulder clearing test can also be given by having the athlete place his/her right palm on his/her left shoulder while raising the elbow as high as possible. If this is painful, the shoulder mobility test should not be performed.

  **Active Straight Leg Raise**

  * The athlete lays supine with the back of the knees against a 2x6, toes pointing up and arms next to his/her side with palms facing up. The athlete then pulls the toes of the right foot toward the shin and raises the right leg straight off the ground as high as possible while keeping the back of the left leg on the 2x6. A three is recorded if the vertical line of the malleolus resides between the mid-thigh and ASIS. If the vertical line is between the mid-thigh and joint line, then a score of two is given.

  **Trunk Stability Pushup** 

  * The athlete assumes a prone position with feet together and hands shoulder width apart. The athlete begins with his/her thumbs at the top of the forehead with the knees fully extended and ankles dorsiflexed. The athlete is then instructed to perform one pushup in this position. A score of three indicates the athlete is able to lift the body as a unit with no lag in the lumbar spine. If the athlete cannot perform a pushup in this position, the thumbs move to chin level and the procedure is repeated. A score of two is given if the pushup is completed in this second position with no lumbar spine lag. A score of one is given if the subject cannot perform a repetition with the body lifting as a unit.

  **Rotary Stability** 

  * The athlete gets on his/her hands and knees over the 2x6 with hands under the shoulders and knees under the hips. The thumbs, knees and toes must contact the sides of the board with toes pulled toward the shins. The athlete then reaches the right hand forward and right leg back at the same time. Without touching down, the right elbow is pulled in and touched to the right knee, and then returned to the extended position again before resuming to the start position. If the athlete is unable to perform this movement, it may be modified to a diagonal pattern. The right arm and left leg are extended and then the same procedure is followed. A score of three indicates that the athlete could perform the correct unilateral repetition; a two is for a correct diagonal repetition while maintaining proper positioning.

#### O﻿ther Screening Assessment Procedures for Lower Extremities 

**1) L﻿ower Limb Length**

* Limb length is used to normalize data collected in all the screening tests. Athletes are placed in a supine position on a treatment table. A standard tape measure is placed on the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) to the distal portion of the medial malleolus bilaterally. Possible pelvis malposition is not taken into account during these measurements.  

**2﻿) Y Balance Test**

* The Y balance test is an adaptation to the Star Excursion Balance Test (Fig. 1). The intra and interrater reliability of the Y balance test is 0.85-0.91 respectively. It has been found that a difference greater than four centimeters between limbs in the posteromedial direction significantly (p=0.001) increases the risk of a non-contact injury by 3.86. Similarly, a deficit of the same difference in the anterior direction increases likelihood of a non-contact and/or contact injury by 2.5.Three tape measures can be fixed to the floor in a Y shape or standard athletic tape may also be used in the same pattern. The athlete then places the distal end of the longest toe at the center point where the three lines intersect. 
* The athlete is then instructed to maximally reach in each direction, posteromedial, posterolateral and anterior, tap the tape measure with the foot and return to the starting position while keeping the stance foot flat on the ground. The trial is repeated if the athlete loses his/her balance during the exercise or when returning to the starting position or if the athlete places the reaching foot on the ground to maintain posture. Each athlete is allowed four to six practice runs in each direction before completing three trials where the maximal distance is recorded. Devices may also be used that have a sliding mechanism where subjects stand facing forward on one block and slide other blocks as far as possible with the tip of the toe in all three directions without moving the body.
* The Star Excursion Balance Test has a similar procedure to the Y Balance test, but also includes reaches in the posterior, anteromedial, anterolateral, lateral and medial directions in addition to the anterior, posteromedial and posterolateral direction for a total of eight reaches. Typically tape is placed on the floor in an asterisk like formation and the patient stands facing forward, reaches in all eight directions and then the clinician measures the distances with a standard tape measure. 

#### Lower Extremity Injuries 

* Lower extremity injuries account for 53% of all injuries sustained across nine sports which is equivalent to over 800,000 lower extremity injuries nationally across high school athletics.9 In basketball, the lower extremity is the most frequently injured body area, accounting for 62% of all injuries. The ankle is by far the most commonly injured joint at 18% of all injuries. However, injury to the knee and patella resulted in more games missed than the two most commonly injured areas, ankle and lumbar spine.

**Knee Injuries: Screening Tools** 

* Along with the ankle, the ACL of the knee is one of the most common lower extremity injury in the NCAA sports.10 Between 150,000 and 200,000 ACL injuries are reported across the United States each year. 30,000 of those injuries occur in female athletes resulting in nearly $650 million of medical costs each year.11 The average expense of an ACL injury, including surgery and rehabilitation services, total around $17,000. The common mechanism of injury includes a noncontact, deceleration motion involving lateral pivoting or twisting and landing.
*  ACL injuries result in osteoarthritic change and overall cartilage damage in fifty to ninety percent of patients seven to twenty years after injury. There is also an increased risk for a re-injury after ACL reconstruction as high as one in every four people. The risk of a second tear is higher in athletes under eighteen years old.14 Due to the expenses and long term consequences associated with ACL ruptures, recent research has been focused on identifying risk factors that may predict the likelihood of injury. 
* It has been shown that females, especially athletes, are more susceptible to ACL tears than males. The NCAA Injury Surveillance System reported that of the female athletes who suffered an ACL injury, 60% had a non-contact mechanism whereas 59% of the ACL injured males were described as a contact injury.This study spanning fifteen NCAA sports showed a continued disparity of the overall injury rate between male and female athletes. Anatomical, hormonal and neuromuscular differences between males and females have been determined to influence this injury rate disparity. Factors such as thigh length, femoral notch width, Q angles, and navicular drop cannot be altered to improve bio-mechanical aspects of the lower extremity.
*  Most of the research pertaining to lower extremity injury screening, ACL ruptures in particular, identify one specific risk factor that was found using one diagnostic test which was designed to look for that specific deficit. Currently, the gold standard is 3D video measurement joint kinematics to screen at risk people.15 However, 2D video analysis, EMG information, Landing Error Scoring System (LESS), postural sway and the Star Excursion Balance Test (SEBT) have all been used to recognize common deficits and dysfunctional movements associated with lower extremity injury. However, it is currently unknown if these diagnostic assessments have the ability to predict lower extremity injury. They are successful in identifying alterations in movement that may predispose athletes to injury and therefore indicate a need for prevention programs. 
* **R﻿isk Factors:**

  * Previous injury history is the most consistent predictor of future injury, but cannot be modified. Instead, bio-mechanical variations that can be improved have been the target of much of the research involving lower extremity injury prediction risk factors. The majority of the studies mention lower extremity valgus, mainly during drop-jump, as a critical predictor in ACL injury risk.  Deficits in neuromuscular control, postural stability and quadriceps dominance are also commonly cited topics of interest. The overall goal of identifying risk factors is to design an assessment tool in order to determine athletes at a higher risk of injury. There is a great need for a screening assessment that inspects all potential risk factors to understand the injury rate disparity between sexes, reduce healthcare expenses and eliminate long-term consequences associated with ACL tears.  
  * The National Basketball Association (NBA) determined that the style of play of the athlete and the individual workload increases risk of injury. This is broken down into the average speed players run during the game, total number of games played, average distance covered by the player throughout the game, average number of minutes played and the average number of field goals attempted.19 According to the authors’ algorithm, they concluded that by resting the top 20% of the high-risk scores at any given day, there is a potential to prevent 60% of all injuries. They believe that injury risk evolves daily and the assessment of the risk needs to be adapted daily as well.    
  *  The LESS can successfully distinguish ACL risk factors with good inter- and intra-rater reliability. But the ability to predict ACL injury based on these risk factors was not included in the study.20 When used to assess military cadets, authors found that LESS can quickly and reliably assess movement patterns in a large population. They identified several differences between males and female abnormal landing patterns. Males tended to most commonly utilize an uneven heel strike landing with tibial external rotation. Females landed with a wider stance which leads to valgus collapse of the knee.20 Despite these differences, all of these factors are considered high risk movements in ACL injury. 
  * Postural stability has also been identified as a risk factor for ACL injury. A deviation of the center of mass increases the valgus load on the ACL and makes this structure vulnerable. Including balance components in training and especially rehabilitation programs after injury, both single and double leg, is crucial in improving postural stability.14 Similarly, neuromuscular control is important in maintaining balance and has been determined to be the primary contributor of ACL injury. Neuromuscular training has the potential to significantly decrease ACL injury rates, but the efficacy and efficiency of training protocols could be improved if they could be designed specifically for predetermined high risk athletes.12 Feed forward mechanisms to load and stabilize the joint are required ACL injury occurs at 17-50 milliseconds after initial ground contact. There is no time for mechanosensory feedback so the knee must rely on the neural reactivation of knee flexors just before ground contact and proprioception.
  * Regardless of the importance of identifying risk factors closely associated with knee injury, accurate prescreening tools are in high demand to classify high risk athletes. Without injury prediction methods, health care professionals are unable to provide individualized interventions to these athletes in an attempt to decrease the injury risk and associated consequences of injury.

**Ankle Injuries: Screening Tools** 

* The SEBT is an inexpensive, quick and reliable test that can be used to screen for lower extremity injuries. Poor balance during this test was associated with an increased risk of ankle injury. The strongest predictor, however, is a history of ankle injury which increases the likelihood of risk fivefold. As with the knee, this factor cannot be modified. Instead, balance and the associated postural sway are considered the most closely related to ankle injury. A simple single leg balance test can be used as a screening tool by health care professionals to identify high risk athletes. This can be done objectively with the athlete on a force plate that measure deviations in center of mass. Or, it can be performed with the health care professional scoring athletes’ sway. Again, similar to knee screening tools, only correlational relationships have been found between ankle injuries and the associated risk factors. Researchers do seem more confident in the ability to predict susceptibility to injury with single leg balance tests nevertheless. 
* **Risk Factors** 

  * Ankle injuries are a common occurrence in basketball, often with residual symptoms affecting performance and chondral lesions. Preventative strategies need to be implemented, but first risk factors associated with ankle injuries must be identified. Postural sway, muscle weakness and imbalance, poor flexibility, hypermobile ankle joint, poor proprioception and previous injury are intrinsic factors that have been recognized as increasing injury risk. Correlations have been found between a high variation of postural sway and a greater likelihood of injury. However, this correlation in one study could only explain 20% of the increase in injury prevalence. Similarly, another study discovered an association between ankle sprains and a positive single leg balance test. The authors stated that this correlation predicts susceptibility to ankle injury, but the exact mechanism responsible for the increased risk of injury is unknown. They also found that the failure to tape the ankles was detrimental in athletes with a positive single leg balance test.